Karma Trends on Hacker News

Observation one: Recognized names generate immediate and significant upvotes. This is probably because people (a) people who realize that giving can also be receiving and join an "in group" in order to boost karma among that in group. (b) follow trends (c) often prefer not to seriously intellectually engage with content. There may also be the fact that many people appreciate those who contribute a lot (I think of patio11, tpateck, edw11 and yegg among others), and instinctively give them karma as a token of appreciation. "Karma boosting" is not necessarily negative, "brand name" colleges essentially do this, creating an elitism and there is a reason why YCombinator is (in my view appropriately) known as the Harvard of incubators. There is a positive "communal bond" forged as a result. 

Observation two: For a controversial posts which are potentially subject to both upvoting and downvoting, voting frequently comes in waves (usually a first wave of downvoting followed by a wave of upvoting).  This appears to have decreased somewhat now that numbers are not present, but still is present. In general with a controversial post it is hard to know what the first couple votes will be, but then it seems that, generally speaking, future posts follow the first couple votes. I suspect this is also harder to "rescue" an inappropriately downmodded post than it is to follow an existing trend.

Observation three: There are a large number of "karma police" that downmod aggressively. I suspect these fall into the following categories:

  (1) People concerned about the "redditization" of Hacker News and decline in comment quality 
  (2) Opinionated people that downmod people they disagree with 

Unfortunately, the combination of both frequently devolves into an exercise in groupthink, where a "troll" becomes anyone who does not follow standard "Hacker" ways about thinking about things. It seems there is a fine line, where some opinon are genuinely dumb, and others may not be mainstream but can nonetheless be intelligent. 

Observation four: Average karma seems to be weighted or entirely determined on recent posts. I have observed swings in my personal average karma from 5 points per post to close to 2 points per post in a couple days period. 

Observation five: First posts on threads invariably attract much more attention and thus karma than longer exchanges (which invariably transpire over a longer period of time). This means that engaged conversations over longer periods of time will almost negatively impact your karma. 

Conclusion: The concept of a "news aggregator," helpful though it is, privileges brief interactions over short period of time and even penalizes longer sustained discussion of topics of interest. Also, communities which perceive a threat (e.g. from "trolls") frequently by tightening controls end up enforcing a sort of groupthink and lose more interesting and intelligent people that do not conform to the standard memes. This may be inevitable given what seems to be the general desirability of "democratizing" the karma voting mechanism to not overly privilege the opinions of some people 

Many of the behaviors demonstrated may be explainable primarily by evolutionary biological principles, such that there is a natural desire to increase one's personal karma, to build up a community by which one's karma is enhanced by social interactions, and to preserve the value of accumulated karma by developing and enforcing social rules.
